[Essay on Complexity by the 10 year engineering lead on MS Office](https://hackernoon.com/complexity-and-strategy-325cd7f59a92#.a9unqyioq)

- Gist of article: favor specialization/duplication over generalization/abstraction.
- As system grows it gets more complex to add more features since everything interacts with each other. 
- "This was clearly a feature that turned that curve convex, making everything new harder to implement. Again, the problem was not because of poor design, the problem was that it interacted with many of the other features we were working on and required additional specification and additional code to implement that specification."
- "In Fred Brooks’ terms, this was essential complexity, not accidental complexity. Features interact — intentionally — and that makes the cost of implementing the N+1 feature closer to N than 1."
- "What I found is that advocates for these new technologies tended to confuse the productivity benefits of working on a small code base (small N essential complexity due to fewer feature interactions and small N cost for features that scale with size of codebase) with the benefits of the new technology itself — efforts using a new technology inherently start small so the benefits get conflated. "
- "Project after project has demonstrated there is nothing about language or underlying technical infrastructure that changes that fundamental curve."
- "he amount of framework code becomes dominated over time by the amount of application code and in fact frameworks over time get absorbed into the overall code base. The framework typically fails to evolve along the path required by the product — which leads to the general advice “you ship it, you own it”. This means that you eventually pay for all that code that lifted your initial productivity."
- "Hyper-ventilation by journalists and analysts about the pace of Google App’s innovation generally ignored the fact that the applications remained relatively simple"
- "The final decision to build the “Word Web App” rather than “a new web-based word processor from Microsoft that is not fully compatible with Word” (and similarly for Excel, PowerPoint and OneNote) was strongly driven by the belief that the file formats continued to serve as a critical competitive moat with immensely strong network effects."
- "Competitive strategy argues that when a competitor attempts to differentiate you need to focus on neutralizing that differentiation as quickly as possible. The path we took did not accomplish that. Google was able to establish a critical competitive beachhead by building on their differentiation. I think it is still too early to see how this will all play out. It is clear the Office apps would not be positioned functionally the way they are now (with fully compatible native and web clients on all devices and support for offline and co-editing) if there had been any squeamishness about embracing the challenges of complexity. That complexity (as it embodies valued functionality) is the moat."